---
layout: post
---
While working on a recent bug a question came up about how permissions work on
NTFS.  Take the following example directory path

c:\University\Fall2005\Homework.cpp

Now imagine that our user University\john had the access rights that were
specified below.  For completeness assume full control for Local System and
Administrators.

  * University: Read & Execute, List Folder Contents, Read (All **Allow**) 
  * Fall2005: Read & Execute, List Folder Contents, Read (All **Deny**) 
  * Homework.cpp: Full Control

The question we had was whether or not University\John would be able to
successfull access (read, edit, save) Homework.cpp.  Some of us with Unix
backgrounds guessed that he would not while most of the rest said that he
would.

After a couple of minutes of discussion we cooked up an example and it turns
out that University\John does indeed have Full Control of the Homework.cpp
file.  To be honest, this caught me completely by surprise.  I did quite a bit
of *nix programming in college and was incorrectly relying on my knowledge of
the *nix file system particulars to answer this question.

If this were a similar *nix example (say /University/Fall2005/Homework.cpp)
our user john would not have access to the file.  When a file lookup is done
in Linux, the VFS layer starts at the base path and looks up every file system
object from the start of the path to the actual file.  If the current process
does not have sufficient permissions to access any object on the path, the
search fails (as it would for the Fall2005 object).

I don't know a lot about NTFS but I can only assume that it performs a lookup
in a different manner.  Then again, assumption got me into this problem ...





